We begin this year and this
Administration in the midst
of an unprecedented crisis that
calls for unprecedented action.
Just this week, we saw more
people file for unemployment
than at any time in the
last twenty-six years,
and experts agree that
if nothing is done,
the unemployment rate
could reach double digits.
Our economy could
fall $1 trillion short
of its full capacity,
which translates into more
than $12,000 in lost
income for a family of four.
And we could lose a
generation of potential,
as more young Americans are
forced to forgo college dreams
or the chance to train for
the jobs of the future.
In short, if we do not
act boldly and swiftly,
a bad situation could
become dramatically worse.
That is why I have proposed
an American Recovery
and Reinvestment Plan
to immediately jumpstart
job creation as well
as long-term economic growth.
I am pleased to say
that both parties
in Congress are already
hard at work on this plan,
and I hope to sign it into
law in less than a month.
It's a plan that will
save or create three
to four million jobs
over the next few years,
and one that recognizes both
the paradox and the promise
of this moment - the fact
that there are millions
of Americans trying to find work
even as, all around the country,
there's so much work to be done.
That's why this is not
just a short-term program
to boost employment.
It's one that will invest in
our most important priorities
like energy and education;
health care
and a new infrastructure that
are necessary to keep us strong
and competitive in
the 21st century.
Today I'd like to
talk specifically
about the progress we expect
to make in each of these areas.
To accelerate the creation
of a clean energy economy,
we will double our capacity to
generate alternative sources
of energy like wind,
solar, and biofuels
over the next three years.
We'll begin to build a new
electricity grid that lay
down more than 3,000 miles
of transmission lines
to convey this new energy
from coast to coast.
We'll save taxpayers $2
billion a year by making 75%
of federal buildings
more energy efficient,
and save the average
working family $350
on their energy bills by
weatherizing 2.5 million homes.
To lower health care
cost, cut medical errors,
and improve care,
we'll computerize the nation's
health record in five years,
saving billions of dollars
in health care costs
and countless lives.
And we'll protect
health insurance for more
than 8 million Americans
who are in danger
of losing their coverage
during this economic downturn.
To ensure our children
can compete and succeed
in this new economy,
we'll renovate
and modernize 10,000 schools,
building state-of-the-art
classrooms, libraries,
and labs to improve learning
for over five million students.
We'll invest more in Pell Grants
to make college affordable
for seven million more students,
provide a $2,500 college tax
credit to four million students,
and triple the number of
fellowships in science
to help spur the next
generation of innovation.
Finally, we will rebuild
and retrofit America
to meet the demands
of the 21st century.
That means repairing and
modernizing thousands of miles
of America's roadways
and providing new
mass transit options
for millions of Americans.
It means protecting America
by securing 90 major ports
and creating a better
communications network
for local law enforcement
and public safety officials
in the event of an emergency.
And it means expanding broadband
access to millions of Americans,
so business can compete
on a level-playing field,
wherever they're located.
I know that some are skeptical
about the size and scale
of this recovery plan.
I understand that skepticism,
which is why this
recovery plan must
and will include
unprecedented measures
that will allow the
American people
to hold my Administration
accountable for these results.
We won't just throw
money at our problems -
we'll invest in what works.
Instead of politicians doling
out money behind a veil
of secrecy, decisions
about where we invest will
be made public, and informed
by independent experts
whenever possible.
We'll launch an unprecedented
effort to root out waste,
inefficiency, and unnecessary
spending in our government,
and every American
will be able to see how
and where we spend
taxpayer dollars by going
to a new website
called recovery.gov.
No one policy or program will
solve the challenges we face
right now, nor will
this crisis recede
in a short period of time.
But if we act now
and act boldly;
if we start rewarding hard work
and responsibility once more;
if we act as citizens
and not partisans
and begin again the work
of remaking America,
then I have faith
that we will emerge
from this trying
time even stronger
and more prosperous
than we were before.
Thanks for listening.